Pandas is an open-source python package built on top of Numpy developed by Wes McKinney. It is used as one of the most important data cleaning and analysis tool. It provides fast, flexible, and expressive data structures.
Pandas is derived from the term “Panel-data-s” an econometrics term for data sets include observations over multiple time periods for the same individuals.

 Types of Pandas Data Structures
Pandas deals with three types of data structures :

Series : Series is a one-dimensional array-like structure with homogeneous data. The size of the series is immutable(cannot be changed) but its values are mutable.
DataFrame : DataFrame is a two-dimensional array-like structure with heterogeneous data. Data is aligned in a tabular manner(Rows &Columns form). The size and values of DataFrame are mutable.
Panel Data : The panel is a three-dimensional data structure with heterogeneous data. It is hard to represent the panel in graphical representation. But it can be illustrated as a container of DataFrame. The size and values of a Panel are mutable.

 How to read and write files?

pandas supports the integration with many file formats or data sources out of the box (csv, excel, sql, json, parquet,…). Importing data from each of these data sources is provided by function with the prefix read_*. Similarly, the to_* methods are used to store data.


 Pandas Common Functions and Methods
Read Comma Separated Value (CSV) file : df.read_csv('file path')
Read Excel file : df.read_csv('file path')
View top rows : df.head()
View bottom rows : df.tail(
Information : df.info()
Summary statistics : df.describe()
Name of columns : df.columns
Shape : df.shape
 Important Terms :
Python
Python is a computer programming language often used to build websites and software, automate tasks, and conduct data analysis. Python is a general-purpose language, meaning it can be used to create a variety of different programs and isn't specialized for any specific problems.
Google Colab
Colaboratory, or “Colab” for short, is a product from Google Research. Colab allows anybody to write and execute arbitrary python code through the browser, and is especially well suited to machine learning, data analysis and education.
Pandas
Pandas is a Python library used for working with data sets.
It has functions for analyzing, cleaning, exploring, and manipulating data.
The name "Pandas" has a reference to both "Panel Data", and "Python Data Analysis" and was created by Wes McKinney in 2008.
Data Frame
Pandas DataFrame is two-dimensional size-mutable, potentially heterogeneous tabular data structure with labeled axes (rows and columns). A Data frame is a two-dimensional data structure, i.e., data is aligned in a tabular fashion in rows and columns.
Data Analysis
Obtaining an understanding of data by considering samples, measurement, and visualization. Data analysis can be particularly useful when a dataset is first received, before one builds the first model. It is also crucial in understanding experiments and debugging problems with the system.


Pandas Series
Pandas Series is a one-dimensional labeled array capable of holding any data type. Pandas Series is built on top of NumPy array objects.
How Pandas Series is different from 1-D Numpy Array
1. Pandas Series can hold a variety of data types whereas Numpy supports only numerical data type
2. Pandas Series supports index labels.
Pandas DataFrame
Pandas Dataframe is a two dimensional labeled data structure. It consists of rows and columns.
Each column in Pandas DataFrame is a Pandas Series.
df.head()
Returns first 5 rows of dataframe (by default).
df. tail()
Returns the last 5 rows of the dataframe(by default).
df.info()
It prints the concise summary of the dataframe. This method prints information of the dataframe like column names, its datatypes, nonnull values, and memory usage
df.dtypes()
Returns a series with the datatypes of each column in the dataframe.
df.shape
Return the number of rows and columns of the dataframe.
df. values
Return the NumPy representation of the DataFrame.
df.to_numpy() → This also returns the NumPy representation of the dataframe.
df.columns
Return the column labels of the dataframe
df. describe()
Generates descriptive statistics. It describes the summary of all numerical columns in the dataframe.
df. describe(include=” all”)
It describes the summary of all columns in the dataframe.
df.col_name.unique()
Returns the unique values in the column as a NumPy array.
df.col_name.value_counts()
Return a Series containing counts of unique values.
df.col_name.astype()
Converting datatype of a particular column.
df.sort_values(by=”Col_1”)
It will sort the dataframe by column ”Col_1”
train_test_split
The train_test_split function of the sklearn. model_selection package in Python splits arrays or matrices into random subsets for train and test data, respectively.
